add episodes on estimate severity (#1)
epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle: episodes/severity-static.Rmd

---
title: 'Estimate severity'
teaching: 10
exercises: 2
editor_options: 
  chunk_output_type: inline
---

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: questions 

- How to estimate the Case Fatality Ratio (CFR)?

> - Why adjust a CFR with a delay distribution?

Author: thank you for noticing this. I'll homogenize to the package terminology of case fatality risk. Although I filled in an issue https://github.com/epiverse-trace/cfr/issues/130 to read more arguments about this. I'll consider adding and referring to this issue in a callout within the episode given how this is used differently across references cited in the episode and vignette.

> - Why adjust a CFR with a delay distribution?

Author: also, replaced the word used in the calculation from ratio to over to express the fraction https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/1/commits/640146cb060e79a832a7588ba4af31acb03de5de

> - When should we estimate the CFR in an ongoing outbreak?

Author: > "When should we estimate the CFR in an ongoing outbreak?" as an Overview item - I didn't really understand what was meant here.

My intention was to express the idea of the possibility of getting an unbiased early-stage estimate, instead of a naive estimate only stable at later stages.

I found valuable also the first suggestions so rephrased the questions in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/1/commits/8cee67065a59b2d822ae74700f66b2bb6120c081

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: objectives

- Estimate the CFR from aggregated case data using `{cfr}`.

- Estimate a delay-adjusted CFR using `{epiparameter}` and `{cfr}`.

- Estimate severity measurements like IFR or HFR using `{cfr}`.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: prereq

## Prerequisites

This episode requires you to be familiar with:

**Data science** : Basic programming with R.

> **Epidemic theory** : Epidemiological parameters. Time periods.

Author: Agreed. Added in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/1/commits/f2e19ea302b60a56539fa2bb1e63b440727fbab5

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

> ## Introduction
> 
> Common questions at the early stage of an epidemic include:
> 
> - What is the likely public health impact of the outbreak? 
> - Is this being or going to be a public health problem?
> - Does the virus have the potential to cause a devastating pandemic?
> 
> We can assess the pandemic potential of an epidemic with two critical measurements: the transmissibility and the clinical severity. ([Fraser et al., 2009](https://www.science.org/doi/full/10.1126/science.1176062), [CDC, 2016](https://www.cdc.gov/flu/pandemic-resources/national-strategy/severity-assessment-framework-508.html))

Author: Thanks for the detailed edit suggestion. I agree with the need to homogenize this to outbreaks or epidemics, we are currently using this indistinctively in the episode (and other documentation). I think this would be appropriate content for a callout #6 . I'm going to prioritize the edits for the questions.

The first one is from [Cori et al.](https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rstb.2016.0371#d1e605) and just frame it to be specific to this episode. 

We can reuse your last paragraph.

```suggestion
## Introduction

Common questions at the early stage of an epidemic include:

- What is the likely public health impact of the outbreak in terms of clinical severity? 
- What are the most severely affected groups?
- Does the outbreak have the potential to cause a very severe pandemic?

We can assess the pandemic potential of an epidemic with two critical measurements: the transmissibility and the clinical severity. ([Fraser et al., 2009](https://www.science.org/doi/full/10.1126/science.1176062), [CDC, 2016](https://www.cdc.gov/flu/pandemic-resources/national-strategy/severity-assessment-framework-508.html))
```

> We can assess the pandemic potential of an epidemic with two critical measurements: the transmissibility and the clinical severity. ([Fraser et al., 2009](https://www.science.org/doi/full/10.1126/science.1176062), [CDC, 2016](https://www.cdc.gov/flu/pandemic-resources/national-strategy/severity-assessment-framework-508.html))

Author: paragraph added in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/1/commits/e93b7560129808b7ed049425503b0201cdb8fe11

> ![HHS Pandemic Planning Scenarios based on the Pandemic Severity Assessment Framework. This uses a combined measure of clinical severity and transmissibility to characterise influenza pandemic scenarios. HHS: United States Department of Health and Human Services ([CDC, 2016](https://www.cdc.gov/flu/pandemic-resources/national-strategy/severity-assessment-framework-508.html)).](fig/cfr-hhs-scenarios-psaf.png){alt='The horizontal axis is the scaled measure of clinical severity, ranging from 1 to 7, where 1 is low, 4 is moderate, and 7 is very severe. The vertical axis is the scaled measure of transmissibility, ranging from 1 to 5, where 1 is low, 3 is moderate, and 5 is highly transmissible. On the graph, HHS pandemic planning scenarios are labeled across four quadrants (A, B, C and D). From left to right, the scenarios are “seasonal range,” “moderate pandemic,” “severe pandemic” and “very severe pandemic.” As clinical severity increases along the horizontal axis, or as transmissibility increases along the vertical axis, the severity of the pandemic planning scenario also increases.'}

Author: added to #7 to look further into this specific

> One epidemiological approach to estimating the clinical severity is quantifying the Case Fatality Ratio or CFR. CFR is the ratio of deaths from an infectious disease to the number of confirmed diagnosed cases. However, calculating this directly from the cumulative number of deaths to cases during an epidemic tends to result in a biased CFR given the time delay from onset to death, varying substantially as the epidemic progresses and stabilising at the later stages of the outbreak ([Ghani et al., 2005](https://academic.oup.com/aje/article/162/5/479/82647?login=false#620743)).

Author: I most of the time doubt if I am one, but can say that both are equivalent. the term clinical is mostly used to refer to health-related severity

> ![Observed biased confirmed case fatality ratio (CFR) estimates as a function of time (thick line) calculated as the ratio of the cumulative number of confirmed cases to deaths at time t. The estimate at the end of an outbreak (i.e. 302/1755 = 17.2 %) is the realised CFR by the end of the epidemic. The horizontal continuous line and dotted lines show the expected value and the 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) of the predicted delay-adjusted CFR estimate (based on Nishiura et al., 2009) only by using the observed data until 27 Mar 2003 (estimated at 18.1 % (95% CI: 10.5, 28.1).](fig/cfr-pone.0006852.g003-fig_c.png)

Author: I agree. For points 2-3 I created #8. I will edit the first and caption here

> ![Observed biased confirmed case fatality ratio (CFR) estimates as a function of time (thick line) calculated as the ratio of the cumulative number of confirmed cases to deaths at time t. The estimate at the end of an outbreak (i.e. 302/1755 = 17.2 %) is the realised CFR by the end of the epidemic. The horizontal continuous line and dotted lines show the expected value and the 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) of the predicted delay-adjusted CFR estimate (based on Nishiura et al., 2009) only by using the observed data until 27 Mar 2003 (estimated at 18.1 % (95% CI: 10.5, 28.1).](fig/cfr-pone.0006852.g003-fig_c.png)

Author: added both in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/1/commits/964524fb2855468a6d015b3d53b777356b1d1c34, plus instructor notes meanwhile.

In this tutorial we are going to learn how to use the `{cfr}` package to calculate and adjust a CFR estimation using [delay distributions](../learners/reference.md#delaydist) from `{epiparameter}` or elsewhere, based on the methods developed by [Nishiura et al., 2009](https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0006852), also, how we can reuse `{cfr}` functions for more severity measurements.

We’ll use the pipe `%>%` to connect some of their functions, so let’s also call to the `{tidyverse}` package:

```{r,message=FALSE,warning=FALSE}
library(cfr)
library(epiparameter)
library(tidyverse)
```

## Naive CFR

> We measure disease severity in terms of case fatality ratio (CFR) --which is given by the ratio of the cumulative number of deaths $D_{t}$ to the cumulative number of confirmed cases $C_{t}$ at a certain time $t$. We can refer to the _naive CFR_ (also crude or biased CFR, $b_{t}$):

Reviewer: I think the concept of a naive CFR should be explained here or earlier

Author: I added one paragraph below this calculation in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/1/commits/52b9e8301d2dd55fa001f1c6a5b682ce8808adf9. Also connected the term in the intro, but not explained or defined. We cover details on biases right after this first calculation. Does this sound like the expected explanation?

$$ b_{t} =  \frac{D_{t}}{C_{t}} $$

<!-- total number of deaths $D$ divided by total number of confirmed cases $C$ -->

:::::::::::::: callout

### What are data sources to estimate CFR?

> [Verity et al., 2020](https://www.thelancet.com/journals/laninf/article/PIIS1473-3099(20)30243-7/fulltext) summaries the spectrum of COVID-19 cases.

Reviewer: I would suggest moving it to an earlier concepts focused section, as I'm not sure it is adding something specific here.

Author: I also found this useful. I moved as a section before the naive CFR section in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/1/commits/f368cfd7e86d8b9c674973ff38c52a2dfd625c42

![Spectrum of COVID-19 cases. The CFR aims to estimate the proportion of Deaths among confirmed cases in an epidemic.](fig/cfr-spectrum-cases-covid19.jpg)

- At the top of the pyramid, those meeting the WHO case criteria for **severe** or critical cases will likely be identified in the hospital setting, presenting with atypical viral pneumonia. These cases will have been identified in mainland China and among those categorised internationally as local transmission. 
- Many more cases are likely to be **symptomatic** (i.e., with fever, cough, or myalgia) but might not require hospitalisation. These cases will have been identified through links to international travel to high-risk areas and through contact-tracing of contacts of confirmed cases. They might also be identified through population surveillance of, for example, influenza-like illness. 
- The bottom part of the pyramid represents **mild** (and possibly **asymptomatic**) cases. These cases might be identified through contact tracing and subsequently via serological testing.

::::::::::::::

To calculate the naive CFR, the `{cfr}` package requires a data frame with three columns named:

- `date`
- `cases`

> - `deaths`

Reviewer: An important point here is that {cfr} works on aggregated incidence data. I have not seen this mentioned in this episode, but the use of incidence data is shown in earlier episodes -- may be worth adding an explanation to distinguish this from linelist data.

Author: I relocated the callout below and added this information more explicitly using EpiNow2 aggregated data and outbreak linelist data https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/1/commits/f4d6942ea8f27bbbd24ce808f53cb9a4ea4388dd

:::::::::::::::::: callout

### We need daily data

These should give the **daily** number of reported cases and deaths. 

We emphasise **daily** because this needs to show all the observations for all the days in the time frame of your analysis, even if the number of observations is zero or there are missing values.

Also, this currently only works for **daily** data, not weekly data.

<!-- suggest ways to deal with raw input weekly data -->
<!-- https://github.com/epiverse-trace/cfr/issues/117 -->

::::::::::::::::::

> Let's explore the `ebola1976` dataset, which comes from the first Ebola outbreak in Zaire in 1976, as analysed by Camacho et al. (2014).

Reviewer: Zaire was an interim name for DRC under military rule - which is when this outbreak occurred - but it's good to use the modern (and original) name.

Author: edited in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/1/commits/072a64b3f3e4b9ce982a0a69ce9072b95f54d792

```{r}
# Load the Ebola 1976 data provided with the package
data("ebola1976")

# view top data
ebola1976 %>% as_tibble()
```

When we use `cfr_static()` to `data` only, we calculate the naive CFR:

```{r}
# Calculate the static CFR without adjusting for delays
cfr_static(data = ebola1976)
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: challenge

Load the `ebola_kikwit_1995` from the `{outbreaks}` package and estimate the naive CFR.

:::::::::::::::::::: hint

Inspect the format of the data input.

- Does it contain daily data?
- Does the column names are as required by `cfr_static()`?
- How would you rename column names from a data frame?

::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::: solution

We can use `dplyr::rename()` to adapt the external data to fit the data input for `cfr_static()`.

```{r}
library(outbreaks)

outbreaks::ebola_kikwit_1995 %>%
  glimpse()

outbreaks::ebola_kikwit_1995 %>%
  dplyr::rename(
    cases = onset,
    deaths = death
  ) %>%
  cfr::cfr_static()
```

::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Biases that affect CFR estimation

> [Lipsitch et al., 2015](https://journals.plos.org/plosntds/article?id=10.1371/journal.pntd.0003846) describe two potential biases that can affect the estimation of CFR (and its possible solutions):

Author: since the episode has prerequisite delay distributions, we expect to to take too much space from this for that topic. I added a link to the glossary at https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/1/commits/3a0fa129ce114f1068abc83612d92bec7dbcdf9f

For a clear dependency, we can redirect to early task episodes where we cover them with more detail

> [Lipsitch et al., 2015](https://journals.plos.org/plosntds/article?id=10.1371/journal.pntd.0003846) describe two potential biases that can affect the estimation of CFR (and its possible solutions):

Author: also added reference of it in the prereq and link to early task tutorials in the glossary https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/1/commits/467aeb1fd2dd37c17a50ec44313065f152704c16

### Bias due to delayed reporting of death

During an _ongoing_ epidemic, there is a delay between the time someone dies and the time their death is reported. Therefore, at any moment in time, the list of cases includes people who will die and whose death has not yet occurred or has occurred but not yet been reported. Thus, dividing the cumulative number of reported deaths by the cumulative number of reported cases at any moment will underestimate the true CFR.

The key determinants of the magnitude of the bias are the epidemic _growth rate_ and the _distribution of delays_ from case-reporting to death-reporting; the longer the delays and the faster the growth rate, the greater the bias.

:::::::::::::::::::: instructor

We can showcase this last bias using the [concept described in this `{cfr}` vignette](https://epiverse-trace.github.io/cfr/articles/cfr.html#concept-how-reporting-delays-bias-cfr-estimates).

<!-- create code and then a .gif? -->

::::::::::::::::::::

> :::::::::::::::::::: testimonial

Reviewer: Should this be renamed to "Case study"?

Author: added a title instead in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/1/commits/bfd2ec0a208c8a30b472e7ab99a06ecd1a946722, to avoid conflicting terminology with how we define [case studies](https://github.com/orgs/epiverse-trace/discussions/81)

In the USA and Canada, no deaths were attributed to the virus in the first ten days following the World Health Organization's declaration of a public health emergency. Even under similar circumstances at the early stage of the global pandemic, public health officials, policymakers and the general public want to know the virulence of an emerging infectious agent.

[Fraser et al., 2009](https://www.science.org/doi/full/10.1126/science.1176062) reinterpreted the data assessing the biases and getting a clinical severity lower than the 1918 influenza pandemic but comparable with that seen in the 1957 pandemic.

::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::: discussion

Based on your experience:

- Share any previous outbreak in which you participated in its response.

Answer to these questions:

- How did you assess the clinical severity of the outbreak?
- What were the primary sources of bias?
- What did you do to take into account the identified bias?
- What complementary analysis would you do to solve the bias?

:::::::::::::::::::: 

## Delay-adjusted CFR

> Nishiura et al., 2009 developed a method that considers the time delay from the onset of symptoms to death.

Reviewer: Add hyperlink to Nishiura et al. 2009

Author: added in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/1/commits/4cb05ef76f3cfb45ca4f30817d578fb7cf5d6fb6

Real-time outbreaks may have a number of deaths that are insufficient to determine the time distribution between onset and death. Therefore, we can estimate the _distribution delay_ from historical outbreaks or reuse the ones available in systematic reviews from repositories like `{epiparameter}` or `{epireview}`.

Let's use `{epiparameter}`:

```{r, message=FALSE, warning=FALSE}
# Get delay distribution
onset_to_death_ebola <-
  epiparameter::epidist_db(
    disease = "Ebola",
    epi_dist = "onset_to_death",
    single_epidist = TRUE
  )
```

To calculate the delay-adjusted CFR, we can use the `cfr_static()` function with the `data` and `delay_density` arguments.

```{r}
# Calculate the static CFR while adjusting for delays
cfr_static(
  data = ebola1976,
  delay_density = function(x) density(onset_to_death_ebola, x)
)

> ```

Reviewer: The format in which the delay distribution is passed to the `delay_density` argument could be explained more - maybe with a visual example? E.g. a plot of the PDF over time. This can also help explain the convenience of using the epidist class.

Author: I added the `plot()` and a spoiler callout on the internal method, redirecting to `estimate_outcomes()`. Added in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/1/commits/1ac361d2b3b7241cf43dc1c008225f534948b0a5

If a visual can make a better explanation, we can fill an issue and draft a visual and get support from Carmen to make this visually appealing.

:::::::::::::::::: callout

### Use the `<epidist>` class

When using an `<epidist>` class object we can use this expression as a template `function(x) density(<EPIDIST_OBJECT>, x)`

For distribution functions with parameters not available in `{epiparameter}`, we suggest you two alternatives: 

- Create an `<epidist>` class object, to plug into other R packages of the outbreak analytics pipeline. Read the [reference documentation of `epiparameter::epidist()`](https://epiverse-trace.github.io/epiparameter/reference/epidist.html), or

> - Read `{cfr}` vignette for [a primer on working with delay distributions](https://epiverse-trace.github.io/cfr/articles/delay_distributions.html).

Reviewer: Somewhere here it would also be good to add a caveat about using continuous distributions in place of discrete ones, and when this is okay. See the [delay distributions vignette in {cfr}](https://epiverse-trace.github.io/cfr/articles/delay_distributions.html#using-continuous-and-discrete-distributions) for an explanation.

Author: We could add a spoiler callout for this. Is discretizing an <epidist> object an appropriate alternative to pass discrete distributions?

```
:::::::::::::::::: spoiler

## When to use discrete distributions?

For `cfr_*()`, the most appropriate choice to pass are **discrete** distributions. This is because we will work with daily case and death data.

We can assume that evaluating the Probability Distribution Function (PDF) of a *continuous* distribution is equivalent to the Probability Mass Function (PMF) of the equivalent *discrete* distribution.

However, this assumption may not be appropriate for distributions with greater picks. For example, when onset-to-death is strongly peaked with a low variance. In such cases, the average disparity between the PDF and PMF is expected to be more pronounced compared to distributions with broader spreads.

In a scenario like the last one, you can opt to discretise the continuous distribution using `epiparameter::discretise()` to an `<epidist>` object.

::::::::::::::::::
```

Reviewer: Yes, seems like a good idea.

  )

out_mean <- out_delay_adjusted %>% pull(severity_mean)
out_low <- out_delay_adjusted %>% pull(severity_low)
out_high <- out_delay_adjusted %>% pull(severity_high)
```

The delay-adjusted CFR indicated that the overall disease severity _at the end of the outbreak_ or with the _latest data available at the moment_ is `r out_mean` with a 95% confidence interval between `r out_low` and `r out_high`, slightly higher than the naive one.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: challenge

Load the `ebola_kikwit_1995` from `{outbreaks}` and estimate the delay-adjusted CFR using the appropriate distribution delay. Then:

- Compare the naive and the delay-adjusted CFR solutions!

:::::::::::::::::::: hint

- Find the appropriate `<epidist>` object!

::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::: solution

```{r}
library(outbreaks)

outbreaks::ebola_kikwit_1995 %>% glimpse()

outbreaks::ebola_kikwit_1995 %>%
  rename(
    cases = onset,
    deaths = death
  ) %>%
  cfr::cfr_static(
    delay_density = function(x) density(onset_to_death_ebola, x)
  )
```

::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## An early-stage CFR estimate

> We just found that the difference between the _naive_ and _delay-adjusted_ CFR estimates using `cfr_static()` are _just slightly_ different. So, what is the main difference?!

Reviewer: The first paragraph has a question about the difference between the naive and delay-corrected estimate that is not really answered later - what you are showing is the (low) impact on the estimated CFR, not the theory behind the difference. I may be nitpicking, but consider rephrasing? Also avoid using `?!`

Author: Should we locate the method callout here as a more appropriate reply? method callout added in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/1/commits/1ac361d2b3b7241cf43dc1c008225f534948b0a5

Author: The intention here is to emphasize the point of using {cfr} as a method to assess CFR at an early stage of an epidemic, and show this visually with the `cfr_rolling()`.

Since the method callout is placed before, I'll reiterate the method aspect briefly here.

Author: I added a sentence and a spoiler callout on the maximum likelihood step of the method, which aims to estimate the unbiased CFR by using the confirmed cases, confirmed deaths, and the underestimation factor (which is informed by the delay distribution presented in the first and previous method callout).

Added for review in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/1/commits/e0662c2004fb98238b5131e380e8c68bc66fad3a

Reviewer: Looks good

The main benefit of using `cfr_static()` is to reduce the time to get an _delay-adjusted CFR_ estimate closer to the overall CFR of the epidemic. 

> `cfr_static()` can assess the virulence of an emerging infectious disease at an epidemic's **early stage**. This is particularly useful when an _epidemic curve of confirmed cases_ is the only data available (i.e. when individual data from onset to death are unavailable, especially during the early stage of the epidemic). Nishiura et al., 2009 depict this in the figures below.

Reviewer: I would not frame it this way. Rather, the static estimate is always useful to get an **overall severity estimate** of the outbreak (so far). Once the outbreak has clearly ended, or has progressed such that deaths are reported more, the estimated CFR is then closest to the 'true' CFR. This is what the figures really show - I would suggest re-interpreting them and modifying this section.

Author: I added this rephrase in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/1/commits/934a687bbfc0b8eb5b6d70beec25947cd2358525

![Observed (biased) confirmed case fatality ratio of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in Hong Kong, 2003.](fig/cfr-pone.0006852.g003-fig_abc.png)

Nevertheless, even by only using the observed data for the period March 19 to April 2, `cfr_static()` can yield an appropriate prediction (Figure D), e.g. the delay-adjusted CFR at March 27 is 18.1 % (95% CI: 10.5, 28.1). An overestimation is seen in the very early stages of the epidemic, but the 95% confidence limits in the later stages include the realised CFR (i.e. 17.2 %).

![Early determination of the delay-adjusted confirmed case fatality ratio of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in Hong Kong, 2003.](fig/cfr-pone.0006852.g003-fig_d.png)

We can explore this behaviour using the `cfr_rolling()` function. With `tail()`, we show that the latest CFR estimates are equal to the `cfr_static()` outputs:  

```{r}
# Calculate the rolling daily naive CFR
rolling_cfr_naive <- cfr::cfr_rolling(data = ebola1976)

tail(rolling_cfr_naive)

> ```

Reviewer: I would explain this as a utility function that automatically calculates CFR for each day of the outbreak with the data available up to that day, saving the user time.

Author: Added with emphasis as callout in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/1/commits/fab45c199a87b1e164cdf0d1d69d63e26963b3a7

Reviewer: Okay, thanks!

  data = ebola1976,
  delay_density = function(x) density(onset_to_death_ebola, x)
)

tail(rolling_cfr_adjusted)
```

Now, let's visualise both results in a time series. How would the naive and delay-adjusted CFR estimates perform in real time?

```{r,echo=FALSE,warning=FALSE,message=FALSE}

# get the latest delay-adjusted CFR
rolling_cfr_adjusted_end <-
  rolling_cfr_adjusted %>%
  dplyr::slice_tail()

# bind by rows both output data frames
bind_rows(
  rolling_cfr_naive %>%
    mutate(method = "naive"),
  rolling_cfr_adjusted %>%
    mutate(method = "adjusted")
) %>%
  # visualise both adjusted and unadjusted rolling estimates
  ggplot() +
  geom_ribbon(
    aes(
      date,
      ymin = severity_low,
      ymax = severity_high,
      fill = method
    ),
    alpha = 0.2, show.legend = FALSE
  ) +
  geom_line(
    aes(date, severity_mean, colour = method)
  ) +
  geom_hline(data = rolling_cfr_adjusted_end,
             aes(yintercept = severity_mean)) +
  geom_hline(data = rolling_cfr_adjusted_end,
             aes(yintercept = severity_low), lty = 2) +
  geom_hline(data = rolling_cfr_adjusted_end,
             aes(yintercept = severity_high), lty = 2)

> ```

Reviewer: This figure could be formatted to look more publication ready; e.g. capitalise axis and legend names, place legend correctly, use uniform theme

Author: added in #9 for further evaluation

The horizontal line represents the delay-adjusted CFR estimated at the outbreak's end. The dotted line means the estimate has a 95% confidence interval (95% CI).

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: challenge

### Interpret the early-stage CFR estimate

Based on the figure above:

- How much difference in days is between the date in which the 95% CI of the estimated _delay-adjusted CFR_ vs _naive CFR_ cross with the CFR estimated at the end of the outbreak?

:::::::::::::::::::::: hint

We can use either visual inspection or analysis of the output data frames.

::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::: solution

There is almost one month of difference.

Note that the estimate has considerable uncertainty at the beginning of the time series. After two weeks, the delay-adjusted CFR approaches the overall CFR estimate at the outbreak's end.

Is this pattern similar to other outbreaks? We can use the data sets in this episode's challenges. We invite you to find it out!

::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::: spoiler

> ### rolling or time-varying?

Reviewer: All uses of "sensible" should read "sensitive"; this is a false friend from Spanish/French <-> English.

Author: fixed in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/1/commits/dd79a767861061cc5753691c40509c744f10adad

The `{cfr}` package has a function called `cfr_time_varying()` with different functionality that makes them not comparable.

#### `cfr_rolling()`

`cfr_rolling()` shows the estimated CFR on each outbreak day, given that future data on cases and deaths is unavailable at the time. The final value of `cfr_rolling()` estimates is identical to `cfr_static()` on the same data.

Remember, as shown above, `cfr_rolling()` is helpful to get early-stage CFR estimates and check whether an outbreak's CFR estimate has stabilised. Thus, `cfr_rolling()` is not sensible to the length or size of the epidemic.

#### `cfr_time_varying()`

On the other hand, `cfr_time_varying()` calculates the CFR over a moving window and helps to understand changes in CFR due to changes in the epidemic, e.g. due to a new variant or increased immunity from vaccination.

> However, `cfr_time_varying()` is sensible to sampling uncertainty. Thus, it is sensible to the size of the outbreak. The higher the number of cases with expected outcomes on a given day, the more reasonable estimates of the time-varying CFR we will get. But if we have a small number of cases throughout the epidemic, we probably need to rely on `cfr_rolling()` that uses the cumulative data.

Reviewer: I am not completely sure about this sentence: "*But if we have a small number of cases throughout the epidemic, we probably need to rely on `cfr_rolling()` that uses the cumulative data."* 
		This seems incorrect to me given the reasoning, as all static CFR estimates are also likely to be biased by changes to the case definition or by changes in virulence or severe outcomes. I think those factors, rather than the size of the outbreak, should be the main consideration when picking a method. Not an epidemiologist, so could be wrong.

Author: I intended to rephrase this https://github.com/epiverse-trace/cfr/issues/123#issuecomment-1921364519 so now opted to add it more explicitly to avoid potential misunderstandings in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/1/commits/0b250efd4945e0e65f2aefb30face60b5577d17d

Reviewer: Okay thanks

---
title: 'Estimate severity'
teaching: 10
exercises: 2
editor_options: 
  chunk_output_type: inline
---

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: questions 

- Why do we estimate the clinical severity of an epidemic?

- How can the Case Fatality Risk (CFR) be estimated early in an ongoing epidemic?

- How do we estimate other severity measurements from different data sources?

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: objectives

- Estimate the CFR from aggregated case data using `{cfr}`.

- Estimate a delay-adjusted CFR using `{epiparameter}` and `{cfr}`.

- Estimate severity measurements like the Hospitalization Fatality Risk (HFR) using `{cfr}`.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: prereq

## Prerequisites

This episode requires you to be familiar with:

**Data science** : Basic programming with R.

> **Epidemic theory** : Epidemiological parameters. Time periods.

Author: I agree, I inherited the term from another episode introducing delay distributions.

```suggestion
**Epidemic theory** : Epidemiological parameters and Delay distributions.
```
